.\" Manpage for for_each_in
.TH FOR_EACH_IN 1 "May 2026" "202605151243-git" "for_each_in"

.SH NAME
for_each_in \- loop over a glob pattern and run a command for each match

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B for_each_in
[\fIoptions\fR] \fI"PATTERN"\fR [\fIconditions\fR] \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B for_each_in
expands a quoted glob pattern and runs a command once for each matching
filesystem entry.  Conditions (bash test flags) filter which entries are
processed.  Placeholders inside command arguments are replaced with
per-entry values before the command is executed.

.SH PATTERN
A quoted glob string such as
.I "./*"
or
.IR "./*/*" .
Quoting is required to prevent the shell from expanding it before
.B for_each_in
receives it.

.SH CONDITIONS
Conditions are standard bash test flags.  All conditions are ANDed: every
one must pass for an entry to be processed.  Conditions may be repeated and
may be mixed with
.BR --not .
.TP
.BI \-e " PATH"
Entry passes if
.I item/PATH
exists (any type).
.TP
.BI \-f " PATH"
Regular file.
.TP
.BI \-d " PATH"
Directory.
.TP
.BI \-L " PATH"
Symbolic link.
.TP
.BI \-r / \-w / \-x " PATH"
Readable / writable / executable.
.TP
.BI \-s " PATH"
Non-empty file.
.TP
.BI \-b / \-c / \-p / \-S " PATH"
Block device / character device / named pipe / socket.
.TP
.BI \-u / \-g / \-k " PATH"
Setuid / setgid / sticky bit set.
.PP
If
.I PATH
is empty or
.BR . ,
the test is applied to the loop entry itself.

.SH NEGATION
.TP
.BI \-\-not " \-FLAG PATH"
Invert the immediately following condition.
Example:
.B --not -L .
skips symbolic links.

.SH SOURCE AND DESTINATION
.TP
.BI \-\-source " PATH"
Declare
.B {source}
and verify that
.I PATH
exists before the loop starts.  Error if it does not exist or if
.B {source}
appears in the command without this flag.
.TP
.BI \-\-dest " PATH"
Declare
.B {dest}
and implicitly add a
.BI \-e " PATH"
condition (entry is skipped unless
.I item/PATH
exists).  Shorthand for
.BI \-e " PATH"
combined with the
.B {dest}
placeholder.

.SH LOOP BEHAVIOUR
.TP
.BR \-n , " \-\-dry\-run"
Print each command before it would run; do not execute anything.
.TP
.BR \-v , " \-\-verbose"
Print each command before executing it.
.TP
.B \-\-stop\-on\-error
Halt the loop on the first non-zero exit from a command.
.TP
.B \-\-summary
Print a processed / skipped / failed count at the end of the loop.
.TP
.B \-\-delete
Remove the target with
.B rm -Rf
before each command executes.  When
.B --dest
is set the target is
.IR item/dest ;
otherwise it is
.I item
itself.

.SH PLACEHOLDERS
Substrings inside any command argument are replaced before execution.
.TP
.B {item}
Full path of the current loop entry.
.TP
.B {dir}
Alias for
.BR {item} .
.TP
.B {item/.}
.I item/.
\(em directory-contents form for
.BR cp ,
.BR mv ,
.BR rsync .
.TP
.B {dir/.}
Alias for
.BR {item/.} .
.TP
.B {base}
Basename of the entry (e.g.\&
.IR AI.md ).
.TP
.B {name}
Basename without extension (e.g.\&
.IR AI ).
.TP
.B {ext}
Extension including the dot (e.g.\&
.IR .md ).
Empty string when there is no extension.
.TP
.B {parent}
Parent directory of the entry.
.TP
.B {source}
Value supplied to
.BR --source .
.TP
.B {source/.}
.I source/.
\(em directory-contents form.
.TP
.B {dest}
.I item/value-of-dest
(e.g.\&
.IR ./proj/AI.md ).
.TP
.B {dest/.}
.I item/dest/.
\(em directory-contents form.
.PP
An empty string argument
.RB ( "" )
is expanded to the full entry path.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-dir " PATH"
Change the working directory to
.I PATH
before the loop runs.
.TP
.B \-\-config
Generate (or regenerate) the user settings file.
.TP
.B \-\-reset\-config
Delete and regenerate the user settings file.
.TP
.B \-\-options
List all available options.
.TP
.B \-\-completions " {short|long|array|list}"
Emit completion data in the requested format.
.TP
.B \-\-silent
Suppress informational output.
.TP
.B \-\-debug
Enable bash
.B set -x
tracing.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI color output.  Honoured alongside the
.B NO_COLOR
environment variable.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Display the current version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display the built-in help and exit.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Copy
.I ./AI.md
into every subdirectory that already contains a file named
.IR AI.md :
.PP
.RS
.nf
for_each_in "./*" -d . --source "./AI.md" --dest "AI.md" \\
    cp -Rfv "{source}" "{dest}"
.fi
.RE
.TP
Rsync a template directory's contents into each matching subdirectory:
.PP
.RS
.nf
for_each_in "./*" -d . --source "./tmpl" --dest "conf" \\
    rsync -avhP "{source/.}" "{dest}/"
.fi
.RE
.TP
Dry-run with a summary:
.PP
.RS
.nf
for_each_in -n --summary "./*" -d . \\
    --source "./AI.md" --dest "AI.md" cp -Rfv "{source}" "{dest}"
.fi
.RE
.TP
Delete dest then replace it (cp):
.PP
.RS
.nf
for_each_in "./*" -d . --source "./AI.md" --dest "AI.md" \\
    --delete cp -Rf "{source}" "{dest}"
.fi
.RE
.TP
Skip symlinks, stop on first error:
.PP
.RS
.nf
for_each_in --stop-on-error "./*" --not -L . mv -fv "{item/.}" /archive/
.fi
.RE

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/myscripts/for_each_in/settings.conf
User settings file.  Generated by
.BR --config .
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/myscripts/for_each_in/backups/
Backup copies of the settings file.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
When set (to any value), disables all ANSI color output.
.TP
.B FOR_EACH_IN_DRY_RUN
Default value for
.BR --dry-run .
.TP
.B FOR_EACH_IN_VERBOSE
Default value for
.BR --verbose .
.TP
.B FOR_EACH_IN_STOP_ON_ERROR
Default value for
.BR --stop-on-error .
.TP
.B FOR_EACH_IN_SUMMARY
Default value for
.BR --summary .
.TP
.B FOR_EACH_IN_DELETE
Default value for
.BR --delete .

.SH TODO
Better documentation.

.SH LICENSE
WTFPL

.SH BUGS
No known bugs.

.SH REPORTING BUGS
https://github.com/casjay-dotfiles/issues

.SH AUTHOR
Currently maintained by Jason Hempstead <jason@casjaysdev.pro>
